The goal of this project is to accurately classify rice grains into their respective varieties using image classification techniques. The proposed solution integrates data preparation, deep learning model development, and a web-based user interface for real-time predictions.

1️⃣ Dataset Preparation

Collected a labeled dataset of rice grain images representing different varieties.

Performed preprocessing steps:

Image resizing to a uniform size.

Normalization of pixel values.

Data augmentation (rotation, flipping, zooming) to enhance model robustness.



2️⃣ Model Architecture

Chose a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) for feature extraction and classification.

Designed a custom CNN model with multiple convolutional, pooling, and dense layers.

Experimented with transfer learning using pre-trained models (e.g., MobileNetV2, ResNet50) to compare performance.

Used categorical_crossentropy loss and Adam optimizer.


3️⃣ Model Training & Evaluation

Split the dataset into training, validation, and test sets.

Trained the model over several epochs, tuning hyperparameters such as learning rate, batch size, and dropout rates to prevent overfitting.

Monitored training using metrics: accuracy, precision, recall, and loss curves.

Achieved an overall test accuracy of 85% (replace with your actual value).


4️⃣ Web Application

Built a user-friendly web interface with HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.

Backend implemented using Flask/Django (depending on your choice) to handle image uploads and serve predictions.

Pages include:

Home: Overview of the project.

About: Details on rice varieties and motivation.

Predict: Upload image, process it, and display classification result.

Contact: Information for queries and feedback.



5️⃣ Deployment

Containerized the application using Docker for consistent deployment across environments.

Deployed the model and web app on cloud platforms (e.g., AWS/GCP/Azure) for accessibility.


6️⃣ Future Improvements

Collect a larger and more diverse dataset.

Integrate explainability methods like Grad-CAM to highlight model decision regions.

Implement mobile support with TensorFlow Lite for on-device predictions.



---

🚀 How to Use This Project

1. Clone the repository:

git clone https://github.com/your-username/rice-classification.git


2. Install dependencies:

pip install -r requirements.txt


3. Train the model or load the pre-trained model:

python train.py


4. Run the web app:

python app.py


5. Open your browser and navigate to http://127.0.0.1:5000/ to start predicting rice types!
